---
id: 331
title: Defining
date: 2016-07-22T02:38:00+00:00
author: CJeremy
layout: post
guid: https://blog-cjeremy.rhcloud.com/?p=331
permalink: /2016/07/22/defining/
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
I&#8217;ve written about this before, but I&#8217;ve gone through most of my school years labeled as &#8220;the smart one&#8221;. Since it&#8217;s a mostly positive label, I haven&#8217;t take particular issue with it. At the same time, I also accepted the term of &#8220;athlete&#8221;. These two terms have been the ones that surround me as I made my way through school, and they still do. Whether or not I like them, they&#8217;re the ones that have been ascribed to me.

However, _I_ know I am much more than just an athlete and a &#8220;smart person&#8221;. I write, I read, I have an interest in everything to do with science, but I also am interested in design and technology. I have many different interests that are all but invisible to the majority of people who meet me.

It&#8217;s not that I don&#8217;t _want_ them to know these things about me. Instead, the reality is that people _can&#8217;t_ keep all these things about me in order in their minds.

Think about it: give me a number that represents an estimation of the people you know. Now tell me, how many details can you remember about a person, on average? Chances are, only a few. This is because we are very good at attaching a few labels to a person, and then calling it a day. From then on, we aren&#8217;t likely to _change_ that label, nor are we to push further than that label if we don&#8217;t interact with this person frequently.

This tells us that we define people quickly and we make broad oversimplifications. The easier a person can be classified in one&#8217;s mind, the better it will be if one wants to recall that information. Therefore, we _reinforce_ this mental model of others in our minds because it makes us feel more secure about knowing our friends and acquaintances.

It&#8217;s not necessarily fair, and it sure will lead to others defining you in ways that you won&#8217;t agree with, but that is how our minds work. We like to categorize in order to reduce complexity. As such, you have two choices: fight every definition others have of you (which requires a lot of energy), or accept the definitions others have of you and move on <sup><a id="ref1" href="#fn1">1</a></sup>.

Others will define you, but you get to choose how you react to such definitions. If you want to be seen in a certain light, _create_ that impression for people. Essentially, force them to define you as the person you want to be. It will never be a complete definition, but it will be one you agree with more.

<sup id="fn1">1. [To be clear, I&#8217;m not referring to people being prejudiced towards you. I&#8217;m talking more about what you are known for, which is usually something to do with your profession.]<a title="Jump back to footnote 1 in the text." href="#ref1">↩</a></sup>