---
id: 477
title: All In
date: 2016-11-28T04:08:00+00:00
author: CJeremy
layout: post
guid: http://blog-cjeremy.rhcloud.com/?p=477
permalink: /2016/11/28/all-in/
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
Have you ever asked yourself if you were all in? If you committed yourself fully to an endeavour, playing the long game and working to achieve big goals?

I&#8217;m sure that I am not alone in guiltily shaking my head at that one.

As much as I admire those who seem to go all in with what they love to do, I&#8217;ve always been too scared to do the same myself. If you&#8217;re anything like me, you worry a lot. Putting all your eggs in one basket is not what you do. Instead, you try and build fail-safes and backups, ensuring that failure isn&#8217;t too harsh.

This has manifested in my life through taking my passions only semi-seriously. I don&#8217;t commit fully. Instead, I dip my toes in on a bunch of things that interest me. This has the advantage of making my activities frequently appear novel, since I&#8217;m always switching from one to the other. On the downside though, I never am able to make the breakthrough that I want.

To get past the current plateau, this is an issue that needs to be resolved. For myself, that means picking a goal in running for 2017 and _sticking_ to it. It means signing up for a race, and not &#8220;waiting until the race approaches to see if I am ready&#8221;. The point isn&#8217;t necessarily to be ready, but to compete on the given day and give what I can. Too often, I find myself getting psyched out because I&#8217;m thinking about what I want to do too much, to the point of detriment. What I need to do is decide, commit, and do. I need to think less and focus on the process. Long term goals are seldom accomplished by accident. They require a commitment to the process of improvement, and being only semi-serious means you are sabotaging your own goals. 

Unfortunately, going all-in isn&#8217;t as simple as this. The difficulty is that fully committing makes you vulnerable. It&#8217;s saying, &#8220;I care enough about this goal that I am going to put myself out there and attempt it, even though I fully know I might not achieve it.&#8221; Even at this stage, my writing isn&#8217;t getting circulated at all. I write, but no one is reading. This is because I haven&#8217;t fully committed. I&#8217;m serious about writing, but not to the point that I&#8217;ve gone all-in. It&#8217;s a future want for me, but at the moment I&#8217;m working on other goals.

Committing isn&#8217;t easy, and it is _extremely_ easy to talk yourself out of it by thinking too much. If I thought about how I run 130 kilometres _every_ week, I don&#8217;t think I could commit. However, I _can_ easily think about committing every day, so that&#8217;s what I do. The end result is 130 kilometres a week, but I&#8217;m not thinking about all the work that is left to do.

* * *

If you want to further your passions and become better at whatever you do, going all-in is the best way to improve. It&#8217;s not easy, and you will be making yourself vulnerable, but you&#8217;re also giving yourself a chance to improve. The key is to not overthink it. Jump right in, and focus on the process instead of the long commitment.