---
id: 569
title: Filler
date: 2017-02-10T04:47:00+00:00
author: CJeremy
layout: post
guid: https://blog-cjeremy.rhcloud.com/?p=569
permalink: /2017/02/10/filler/
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
It&#8217;s not exactly a secret that I don&#8217;t like how mathematics is done in secondary four and five. I feel like the mathematics course for those not pursuing a career in STEM isn&#8217;t exactly the best use of a student&#8217;s time, because the curriculum doesn&#8217;t give students the full picture.

I just want to talk about one particular concept that drives me nuts: the parabola function. In secondary four and five, I studied them in essentially their full glory, looking at how a parabola is constructed (using a directrix), as well as the full equation (given by $f(x) = ax^2 + bx + c$). In the &#8220;science&#8221; flavour of mathematics for secondary four and five, you look at all of that. It&#8217;s more or less all you need to know about the function.

However, when you&#8217;re in the regular flavour of mathematics in secondary four, you still look at the parabola function, but it has been castrated. I&#8217;m not kidding when I say students literally look at the function as only this: $f(x) = ax^2$. Said differently, while I studied any kind of parabola on the Cartesian plane, those in the other mathematics class look _solely_ at the parabolas with their vertex at the origin.

The only question I can think of is, &#8220;What&#8217;s the point?&#8221; If they aren&#8217;t even going to look at parabolas in general and confine them to the origin, is there any real use to showing them? I mean, you literally cannot make a physical example of throwing an object because the parabola at the origin won&#8217;t describe that sort of motion! The classic use case of the parabola isn&#8217;t even applicable to these students.

I think it&#8217;s a shame that these kinds of topics are in the regular secondary mathematics. In my mind, they are just filler for the year, because there&#8217;s no further explanation of them when there is so much more they could look at (without too a lot of added difficulty, either). I just don&#8217;t get how concepts like these can be shown in the form that they are now.