---
id: 567
title: Juggling
date: 2017-02-06T01:41:00+00:00
author: CJeremy
layout: post
guid: https://blog-cjeremy.rhcloud.com/?p=567
permalink: /2017/02/06/juggling/
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
In my personal life, I have several different kinds of hobbies and interests. Obviously, you can see from my site that I love to write, and so it probably isn&#8217;t surprising that I enjoy reading as well. Additionally, I enjoy sports as a whole, but specifically I have a knack (and a love) for running, basketball, hockey, badminton, squash, and many other ones as well. However, if I had to choose which sports I participate on a _serious_ basis, it would have to be solely running. I like all the other ones mentioned, but running is the one where I put a huge portion of my time and energy in. Likewise, I spend a good amount of effort writing and reading, so I would consider those my three big areas of my life.

But that&#8217;s just my personal life. Of course, my education is also extremely important to me, and in terms of my professional life, I&#8217;m working on becoming a better teacher. So that&#8217;s a quick list of the things that are important to me in my life, and they are what I spend most of my resources on.

Now, that&#8217;s not to say that I don&#8217;t have _other_ interests. I&#8217;m the sort of person who is curious about many different fields. My interests include things like technology, AI and computer science, design, photography, typography, music, and video games. I imagine that I am like many others in the fact that I know a lot of geeky and seemingly random information concerning fields and areas of life that people would not expect me to have any knowledge about. I know a bit about the characteristics of type, the call-outs of many maps in _Halo_, principles of design, and many things about computers. Yet, my &#8220;big areas&#8221; are physics, mathematics, running, reading, and writing, not exactly applicable to the other things I listed above. But the point is that I have only _dabbled_ in these other interests. I haven&#8217;t dug deep into them like I have with my core interests, and it makes all the difference.

* * *

Last year, I tried to learn a bit more on the guitar. This didn&#8217;t go so well. I learned some chords, but nothing came of it. Ultimately, I shelved this interest because I didn&#8217;t want to dedicate as much time to it as I did with my running. I saw that the two were competing for attention, and that I cared more about running, so I gave up my musical ambition.

Likewise, you cannot expect to simply add a new hobby into your life without encountering issues. More likely, you&#8217;ll have to make a decision between something you already do. The simple reality is that we have a limited time to do what we want each day, so we have to choose what to spend it on. That means making a difficult decision between things you enjoy. If you split your time, you&#8217;ll also split your focus. You can go that route, but you will always be limiting yourself.

There is always a juggling act going on in your life. Some things get more attention than others, and that&#8217;s alright. The important part is that _you_ choose which things you want to be a focus in your life. Spend the time on things that interest you, and remember that it won&#8217;t be locked in stone forever.