---
id: 574
title: Notes
date: 2017-02-22T04:52:00+00:00
author: CJeremy
layout: post
guid: http://blog-cjeremy.rhcloud.com/?p=574
permalink: /2017/02/22/notes/
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
It&#8217;s no secret that if you walk into a classroom at random (but more specifically, a science or mathematics classroom), you will see a lecturer up front, with a bunch of students listening and taking notes. Sometimes, it might even seem like the students are barely paying attention to the _words_ of the teacher, preferring to just copy what is on the board or screen.

I&#8217;ve heard many people criticize this aspect of school, saying that educational institutions have transformed learning into a state of copying what&#8217;s up front and not even _thinking_ during lectures. I&#8217;m sure you&#8217;ve also seen the odd student in a classroom who _isn&#8217;t_ taking notes. Often, they just don&#8217;t care about paying attention in class, but other times, they feel like they learn better from only listening.

I&#8217;ve thought about both of these approaches a lot, and I can&#8217;t completely come up with a perfect answer to which one I think is better. It&#8217;s probably tradition more than anything that made me take notes through each year of school. I still do, in almost every class.

Critics of taking notes might say, &#8220;But you can get all the stuff the professor is saying from books! Lectures are for listening and absorbing the way people think.&#8221; (I&#8217;ve gotten this line of reasoning as I read Richard Dawkins&#8217; _An Appetite For Wonder_.)

I agree with the general idea, but I think this misses a crucial aspect of what writing notes does, at least for me. When I write notes, I don&#8217;t necessarily write _everything_ down from what the teacher does, because some of it isn&#8217;t important. What I _do_ write down is usually different laws or equations, and their derivations. To me, this is useful to have. Yes, I could get it all from a textbook, but writing it down in my own notebook allows me to make the information even _more_ dense. I don&#8217;t have to go about explaining all the things that are obvious to me. I can jump right ahead to the heart of the matter. This way, I rarely have to flip through a textbook to find what I want, because I have it in my own writing.

The added benefit of doing this is that I can write down explanations that _I_ need while looking at a concept, which others might not find useful. Since I&#8217;m writing notes while the lecture goes on, I can give myself little reminders here and there to help me out for later. This may seem trivial, but it can be a big help for when I look at my notes later (which I do, though Dawkins says he never did).

Additionally, I think there&#8217;s something to be said about remembering things you&#8217;ve written down. I forget things easily, but it seems like just the act of writing them down helps me remember. I often don&#8217;t even _need_ to look at the reminders I write for myself because I remember writing them. I think it&#8217;s very possible that this same sort of thing happens when writing notes in class. I don&#8217;t have research on this, but writing the ideas down seems to help me internalize them, much like actually _doing_ problems is more useful to me than simply skimming through them. Therefore, I think taking notes isn&#8217;t quite as bad as it may seem at first glance.

The way I take notes is simple: I write down equations and lines of arguments. I usually end up writing definitions, but only insofar that they help me understand what is next. Crucially, I try to participate often in class, which means I&#8217;m not just writing down notes and staying consumed in the act of writing all the time. I try to stay connected to questions being posed, and I also try and think of my _own_ questions.

* * *

My advice is this: if you feel that you&#8217;re doing fine without taking notes, there&#8217;s absolutely _no_ need for you to start. Personally, I find taking notes in class allows me to skip having to go and look at all the equations and theory later while I&#8217;m doing homework. I have it all in front of me in my notes, which are usually easier to read at a glance. If you _do_ take notes, keep in mind that you don&#8217;t have to write down everything that is said and put up front in class. A lot of it is context, and the key is to give yourself enough context to remember the content of class, but you don&#8217;t have to recreate it. Notes are fine, just don&#8217;t go overboard.